---
title: Hey.com
link: https://hey.com/
category: linked
---

A new, currently invite-only email service from called [Hey](https://hey.com/), made by the same
people behind [Basecamp](https://basecamp.com/) is gearing up for a July launch. To get an
invitation, [you have to send them a story about email](https://hey.com/soon/): “Could be a love
story, or a hate story. Could be long, could be short.”

I just sent in my story, which I'll reproduce here for posterity:

> SUBJECT: My love in the time of COVID-19 story
>
> I'm a university teacher. And when classes moved entirely online suddenly in March, there was so
> much attention paid to Zoom and Skype and all the rest.
>
> But I took all of my comfort in the availability of email, and spent a lot of effort making sure
> that everything students needed to be done could be done over email.
>
> The reason for that is that I had students returning home to all corners of the globe. Reliable
> internet, let alone high-speed internet, was not something they could at all count on.
>
> But email is the venerable champion of low-bandwidth, spotty connections. Compose it as you have
> time. Send and receive it as you have connectivity. Nobody controls it.
>
> Most of my students were able to connect using Basecamp (thanks!), but everyone was still able to
> stay in touch, ask questions, submit work, and all the rest...not thanks to some garbage LMS like
> Blackboard, but thanks to email.
>
> ...I'm super-excited about Hey.com, and I would really like this to be one of the last emails I
> compose and send from my GMail account. Especially because here goes Safari again warning me that
> *This webpage is consuming significant resources...*
